Status:      published
Title:       Ch-ch-ch-ch-changes
Summary:     My (new) website has been online for a few months, I'm
             fairly satisfied with how it turned out and therefore want
             to explain how this website came to be, covering reasons
             for and technical details of some decisions.


Curriculum vitae
================

Every now and then you are reminded of your CV, either by yourself or
because of people around you looking for a job and/or updating theirs.
In most cases I decide that I should update mine as well and then in the
end I don't. However, this time, maybe because many things are (looking
to be) changing around me in the near future, I got myself to actually
do it.

My outdated CV wasn't actually as bad as I expected. What I found was a
document with a half finished LaTeX layout, using the default (not very
pretty) Latin Modern font, and work experience dating back a few years.
After redoing parts of the CV, I finished the layout and managed to
update its contents, too.

<aside markdown="1">

## My updated CV

You can access my CV on [its own page][], but in case you're interested,
you can find it here as well:

<ul class="section">
	<li>
		<span class="language">English</span>
		<span class="separator">–</span>
		<a class="title" href="{filename}/media/cv/timwienk-cv-english.pdf">Download CV</a>
	</li>
	<li>
		<span class="language">Dutch</span>
		<span class="separator">–</span>
		<a class="title" href="{filename}/media/cv/timwienk-cv-nederlands.pdf">Download CV</a>
	</li>
</ul>
</aside>

Next up, I wanted to store my CV on my personal website for easy access.
Great idea, except my website looked... "old". It hardly contained any
relevant information and it didn't even look decent.

My previous website was originally built with [Mark "keeto" Obcena][]'s
[Raccoon][] framework, which was very interesting at the time, but after
moving things around servers, my website ended up being stripped down
and served by an old test installation of the platform we develop at the
company I work at: not ideal.

Since I was now happy with my "new" CV, I decided to use that as base
concept for a new website. The website didn't have to look great, it
just had to look decent enough, be simple, and most importantly it
should be care free.


Care free
=========

Because of my history maintaining my own website, I wanted my new
website to be simple and to not require any maintenance other than
adding content (just in case I want to do that). However, I still wanted
to host it myself, so I don't have to trust others to handle things
right.

This had me thinking for a bit.

It ruled out in advance any third party services or using something
experimental, requiring regular security updates or something that could
be unstable otherwise. It basically meant I could not use most pieces
of website creation/hosting software out there.

I concluded that what I needed was a static website. Luckily having a
static website doesn't mean it can't be generated by something less
static, and there happens to be a decent amount of software out there to
choose from.

<aside markdown="1">
## Static websites

Most websites nowadays are generated on the fly by a dynamic system: a
web request comes in, data is fetched from a database, passed through
some layers and in the end HTML comes out.

Static websites, however, have their HTML stored in files in advance,
and the only thing that has to be done for a web request is to serve
that pre-created HTML file.
</aside>

A static website would provide and easy and efficient website, without
needing anything special that could potentially break. As long as the
web server works, the website works, which is great since I have other
reasons to adminsiter and maintain my servers anyway, so it's basically
zero effort.

All I needed to do now was to find static website generating software
that suits my needs and wishes for flexibility.


Pelican
=======

After searching and comparing, I settled for a Python based static
website generator called [Pelican][]. It seems rather stable and
decently organised, it's very extensible and is relatively easy to use
and configure.

<aside markdown="1">
## Pelican

[Pelican][] is a static website generator, written in Python, that
requires no database or server-side logic. Some of the features include:

- write your content in reStructuredText, Markdown, or AsciiDoc formats,
- completely static output that is easy to host anywhere,
- themes that can be customized via Jinja templates,
- publish content in multiple languages,
- atom/RSS feeds,
- code syntax highlighting,
- import from WordPress, Dotclear, RSS feeds, and other services,
- modular plugin system and corresponding plugin repository.

Documentation is available on [docs.pelican.com][].
</aside>

The way it implements multiple languages for pages and articles works
pretty nicely and is flexible enough to fit in templates the way I like
it, which is important because I want my website to have its content
both in English and Dutch.


Installation
------------

My web server has Python 2.7 installed with PIP 1.5.6, the versions
available in Debian Jessie. To get started I created a virtualenv with
the necessary packages installed:

```bash
python -m virtualenv ~/website
. ~/website/bin/activate
pip install pelican Markdown
```

The available version of PIP does show two compilation errors when
installing, while newer versions of PIP silence them. The errors are not
important and won't affect you.

The situation is that Jinja2 has some optional features that use syntax
only valid in Python 3.5+, because all files are precompiled during
installation, the files containing these features (`asyncsupport.py` and
`asyncfilters.py`) generate errors.


Generating the website
----------------------

I set up the website in `~/website/srv`. Assuming all configuration is
done and content is added, generating the website is nothing more than
calling `pelican` from inside the virtualenv.

```bash
. ~/website/bin/activate
cd ~/website/srv
pelican
```

However, since I don't want to have to remember to activate the
virtualenv and since I like to be able to generate the website from any
directory I happen to be working in, I created a simple `run` script.

```python
#!/home/tim/website/bin/python
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
import os
import sys
import pelican

if __name__ == '__main__':
	directory = os.path.dirname(os.path.realpath(__file__))
	if directory != os.getcwd():
		os.chdir(directory)

	sys.argv[0] = 'pelican'
	sys.exit(pelican.main())
```

To generate the website, I can now just call:

```bash
~/website/srv/run
```


Configuration
-------------

The initial configuration is very easily done through
`pelican-quickstart`. I answered "no" to questions about extra scripts,
and was left with the following files:

- `content` _(directory)_
- `output` _(directory)_
- `pelicanconf.py`
- `publishconf.py`

I did not see a reason for a separate publish configuration in my case,
so I added the settings from `publishconf.py` to `pelicanconf.py` and
got rid of the former.

The documentation about the configuration is extensive and very good and
teh configuration is rather logical by itself. You can find my
[configuration on Github][], but I'll go into details about it here as
well (mostly in case I do end up needing a reminder myself - but perhaps
it helps someone else as well).

To start off I created a `plugins` directory in addition to the existing
directories and set the following base settings:

```python
AUTHOR = 'Tim Wienk'
SITENAME = 'Tim.Wienk.name'
SITEURL = 'https://tim.wienk.name'
RELATIVE_URLS = False

PATH = 'content'
PLUGIN_PATHS = ['plugins']
OUTPUT_PATH = 'output/'
DELETE_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY = True

TIMEZONE = 'Europe/Amsterdam'
DEFAULT_LANG = 'en'
DEFAULT_DATE = 'fs'
DEFAULT_DATE_FORMAT = '%Y-%m-%d'
```

I wanted the website to be in both English and Dutch and I decided that
I did not care for a lot of Pelican's default pages.

It seemed most logical to me to just separate the website in an `en` and
an `nl` section, have all pages as Markdown files in their respective
section directories, and I wanted a place to store "private" data for
use with potential plugins.

I also figured it would be easiest to have all pages (and articles)
saved as `index.html` files in their own output directories. If I wanted
to, I could then easily rewrite paths in the web server configuration
later to strip the `/` and `/index.html` suffixes.

To achieve these things, I added the following configuration:

```python
PAGE_PATHS = ['en', 'nl']
ARTICLE_PATHS = ['en/articles', 'nl/articles']
STATIC_PATHS = ['']
STATIC_EXCLUDES = ['data']

ARTICLE_URL = '{lang}/articles/{slug}'
ARTICLE_SAVE_AS = '{lang}/articles/{slug}/index.html'
ARTICLE_LANG_URL = ARTICLE_URL
ARTICLE_LANG_SAVE_AS = ARTICLE_SAVE_AS
DRAFT_URL = '{lang}/articles/{slug}/draft.html'
DRAFT_SAVE_AS = '{lang}/articles/{slug}/draft.html'
DRAFT_LANG_URL = DRAFT_URL
DRAFT_LANG_SAVE_AS = DRAFT_SAVE_AS
PAGE_URL = '{lang}/{slug}'
PAGE_SAVE_AS = '{lang}/{slug}/index.html'
PAGE_LANG_URL = PAGE_URL
PAGE_LANG_SAVE_AS = PAGE_SAVE_AS
ARCHIVES_SAVE_AS = ''
AUTHOR_SAVE_AS = ''
INDEX_SAVE_AS = ''
AUTHORS_SAVE_AS = ''
CATEGORY_SAVE_AS = ''
CATEGORIES_SAVE_AS = ''
TAG_SAVE_AS = ''
TAGS_SAVE_AS = ''
```

Next, I did not want to have to have to configure more per-page data
than necessary, but I did want full control over it.

I disabled some options for categories and I hoped to be able to fetch
all relevant data from the path using the `PATH_METADATA` setting. Of
course not everything turned out to be available this way, so there is
some extra metadata configured, too.

```python
USE_FOLDER_AS_CATEGORY = False
DISPLAY_CATEGORIES_ON_MENU = False
DEFAULT_PAGINATION = False
DEFAULT_CATEGORY = 'article'

SLUG_SUBSTITUTIONS = (
	('&', 'and'),
)

PATH_METADATA = '(?P<lang>[a-z]{2})/(?:articles/(?P<date>\d{4}\d{2}\d{2})\.)?(?P<slug>.*)\.[a-z]{1,4}'
EXTRA_PATH_METADATA = {
	'en/index.md': {'save_as': 'en/index.html', 'url': 'en'},
	'nl/index.md': {'save_as': 'nl/index.html', 'url': 'nl'},
	'en/error/400.md': {'save_as': 'error/400.html', 'status': 'hidden'},
	'en/error/401.md': {'save_as': 'error/401.html', 'status': 'hidden'},
	'en/error/403.md': {'save_as': 'error/403.html', 'status': 'hidden'},
	'en/error/404.md': {'save_as': 'error/404.html', 'status': 'hidden'},
	'en/error/410.md': {'save_as': 'error/410.html', 'status': 'hidden'},
	'en/error/500.md': {'save_as': 'error/500.html', 'status': 'hidden'},
}
```

Obviously, all of this just working would have been too easy. I ran into
a problem where Pelican would error when generating pages without a date
in the path, even though it's an optional item in the regular
expression.

To work around this problem, I monkey patched the relevant function in
the `run` script I created to wrap the website generation. (**Edit** - I
recently [submitted this patch][] to the Pelican project as well.)

<aside markdown="1">
### Monkey patching

Monkey patching refers to the act of modifying third party code
(generally part of a class or module) to work around a specific issue
locally.

This can often lead to problems when updating software, so caution is
advised when making these kinds of local changes.
</aside>

```python
import os
import re
import pelican

def parse_path_metadata(source_path, settings=None, process=None):
    metadata = {}
    dirname, basename = os.path.split(source_path)
    base, ext = os.path.splitext(basename)
    subdir = os.path.basename(dirname)
    if settings:
        checks = []
        for key, data in [('FILENAME_METADATA', base),
                          ('PATH_METADATA', source_path)]:
            checks.append((settings.get(key, None), data))
        if settings.get('USE_FOLDER_AS_CATEGORY', None):
            checks.append(('(?P<category>.*)', subdir))
        for regexp, data in checks:
            if regexp and data:
                match = re.match(regexp, data)
                if match:
                    # .items() for py3k compat.
                    for k, v in match.groupdict().items():
                        k = k.lower()  # metadata must be lowercase
                        if k not in metadata and v is not None:
                            if process:
                                v = process(k, v)
                            metadata[k] = v
    return metadata

pelican.readers.parse_path_metadata = parse_path_metadata
```

With the basics working, I went through the (pretty extensive)
collection of plugins. I added "neighbors," for next/previous article
functionality, and "touch", so files have a relevant modified date
(useful for browser caches). I created my own theme, creatively named
"theme" and set some Markdown, Jinja2, feed and sitemap settings.

For sitemap generation, the projects page and support for HTML sections
I did some more specific work:

### Sitemap

To generate a sitemap, I took the "sitemap" plugin and changed a few
things to add more differentiation for the reported change frequencies
and priorities based on the type of page or file.

### Github contributions

An additional feature I wanted, to make the "projects" page look a bit
more interesting, was a list of actual Github project contributions,
rather than just a list of projects or a projects' activity. For this I
created a simple "githubcontributions" plugin, which fetches (and
caches) the relevant data.

The reason for the cache is that I ran into a situation with inactive
repositories, where the first call won't return any data and a next call
would have to wait a few seconds, making fetching data for all projects
is really slow, which in turn makes generating the website really slow.

### HTML sections

I created a simple ["customsection" extension][] for Markdown, loosely
based on an existing "sections" extension, to wrap content in sections
and do some heading renumbering.

```python
PLUGINS = ['neighbors', 'githubcontributions', 'touch', 'sitemap']
THEME = 'theme'
THEME_STATIC_DIR = ''

MARKDOWN = {
	'extensions': ['extra', 'headerid', 'meta', 'plugins.markdown_customsection'],
	'extension_configs': {
		'codehilite': {
			'linenums': False,
			'guess_lang': False,
			'css_class': 'code',
		},
	},
	'output_format': 'xhtml5',
}
JINJA_ENVIRONMENT = {
	'extensions': ['jinja2.ext.i18n'],
}

FEED_ALL_ATOM = 'atom.xml'
CATEGORY_FEED_ATOM = None
AUTHOR_FEED_ATOM = None
AUTHOR_FEED_RSS = None
TRANSLATION_FEED_ATOM = '%s/atom.xml'

SITEMAP = {
	'format': 'xml',
	'extra_files': ['media/cv/timwienk-cv-nederlands.pdf', 'media/cv/timwienk-cv-english.pdf']
}
```

All that remains is some other configuration that is either used by
plugins or in the theme templates. For completeness:

```python
from datetime import date

SOCIAL = (
    ('GitHub', 'https://github.com/timwienk', '/timwienk'),
    ('LinkedIn', 'https://www.linkedin.com/in/timwienk', '/in/timwienk'),
    ('Twitter', 'https://twitter.com/timwienk', '@timwienk'),
    ('Facebook', 'https://www.facebook.com/timwienk', '/timwienk'),
    ('Google+', 'https://plus.google.com/+TimWienk', '+timwienk'),
)
GITHUB_USER = 'timwienk'
FACEBOOK_USER = 'timwienk'
TWITTER_USER = 'timwienk'

FIRST_YEAR = 1989
LAST_YEAR = date.today().year

GOOGLE_ANALYTICS = 'UA-7267499-1'
GOOGLE_ANALYTICS_ID_SCRIPT = '/scripts/id'
```

Theme
-----

Pelican themes consist of a collection of static files and Jinja2
templates. I found it very easy to set up, and since you can set
specific templates for specific pages, it's easy to incorporate
differences for "special" pages using the template `extends` and `block`
features.

I decided against adding things like gettext to actually organise
translations properly, since my website is rather small I don't expect
to add more languages or translatable fixed text. Perhaps I will add
that in the future, but for now just doing language dependent things in
the template will do.

I don't think it helps to go in-depth about the theme, you can find the
[theme on Github][] if you're interested in the details.


Apache HTTP Server
==================

To serve my website I stuck with the Apache HTTP Server. Even though I
do like Nginx's approach and it's proven itself very fast and efficient,
I didn't think these aspects were very important in my case, and since I
already had the Apache HTTP Server running on my webserver for other
projects, the choice wasn't very hard.

Most of the required configuration was just setting up a VirtualHost
with the correct settings:

```apache
<VirtualHost *:443>
    ServerName tim.wienk.name
    ServerAdmin webmaster@localhost

    DocumentRoot /srv/www/tim.wienk.name/http

    ErrorLog  ${APACHE_LOG_DIR}/error.log
    CustomLog ${APACHE_LOG_DIR}/access.log combined

    SSLEngine on
    SSLHonorCipherOrder   on
    SSLUseStapling        on
    SSLCertificateFile    /srv/acme/certs/tim.wienk.name.crt
    SSLCertificateKeyFile /srv/acme/private/tim.wienk.name.key
    BrowserMatch "MSIE [2-6]" nokeepalive ssl-unclean-shutdown downgrade-1.0 force-response-1.0
    BrowserMatch "MSIE [17-9]" ssl-unclean-shutdown
```

You might have gathered from this bit that I attempt to store data in
their FHS defined locations. That being said,
`/srv/www/tim.wienk.name/http` is actually a symbolic link to
`/home/tim/website/srv/output` to keep things simple.

<aside markdown="1">
## Filesystem Hierarchy Standard

The defined directory structure for Unix-like operating systems. It
provides separation based on the purpose of the stored data, making it
easier to manage and predict the security of data and making it easier
to decide on filesystem separation.

As an example, the `/srv` filesystem is meant to be used for data for
services provided by the system.
</aside>

For SSL I opted to use the Let's Encrypt ACME setup, although I do have
the certificate management separated from the webserver as much as
possible.

<aside markdown="1">
## Automatic Certificate Management Environment

ACME is a protocol to help automate the request, authentication and
provision of (free) SSL certificates, designed as part of the "HTTPS
everywhere" initiatives. As far as I know it's currently only in use by
its designer [Let's Encrypt][].
</aside>

As part of the Pelican setup I generated a bunch of simple error
documents, I configured those here as well:

```apache
    ErrorDocument 400 /error/400.html
    ErrorDocument 401 /error/401.html
    ErrorDocument 403 /error/403.html
    ErrorDocument 404 /error/404.html
    ErrorDocument 410 /error/410.html
    ErrorDocument 500 /error/500.html
```

Next I also wanted to add some extra headers for good measure:
[X-Content-Type-Options][] and [X-Frame-Options][] for all pages, and a
`Link` header to the "home page" to explain non-human visitors what's
going on:

```apache
    <IfModule mod_headers.c>
        Header always set Link "<https://tim.wienk.name/>; rel=canonical; hreflang=x-default" "expr=%{REQUEST_URI}=='/'"
        Header always append Link "<https://tim.wienk.name/>; rel=alternate; hreflang=x-default" "expr=%{REQUEST_URI}=='/'"
        Header always append Link "<https://tim.wienk.name/en>; rel=alternate; hreflang=en" "expr=%{REQUEST_URI}=='/'"
        Header always append Link "<https://tim.wienk.name/nl>; rel=alternate; hreflang=nl" "expr=%{REQUEST_URI}=='/'"
		Header always set X-XSS-Protection "1; mode=block"
        Header always set X-Content-Type-Options "nosniff"
        Header always set X-Frame-Options "DENY"
    </IfModule>
```

And lastly I added rewrite rules so all pages are accessible without `/`
or `/index.html` suffix, with a special condition based on the
`Accept-Language` header for the home page and a few extra redirects in
case people try to access content without language prefix:

```apache
	RewriteEngine on

	RewriteCond %{HTTP:Accept-Language} ^nl [NC]
	RewriteRule ^/?$                       /nl             [R=302,QSA,L]
	RewriteRule ^/?$                       /en             [R=302,QSA,L]

	RewriteRule ^/about/?$                 /en/about       [R=301,QSA,L]
	RewriteRule ^/articles/?$              /en/articles    [R=301,QSA,L]
	RewriteRule ^/contact/?$               /en/contact     [R=301,QSA,L]
	RewriteRule ^/cv/?$                    /en/cv          [R=301,QSA,L]
	RewriteRule ^/projects/?$              /en/projects    [R=301,QSA,L]

	RewriteRule ^/(.*)/(index.html)?$      /$1             [R=301,QSA,L]

	RewriteCond /srv/www/tim.wienk.name/http/%{REQUEST_URI}/index.html -f
	RewriteRule ^/(.*)$                    /$1/index.html  [QSA,L]
</VirtualHost>
```

The end result is what you see now, a working, simple website. There
still isn't a lot of content, but perhaps that will come in the future,
at least I now have the option without having to worry about the website
itself too much.


[its own page]: /en/cv
[Mark "keeto" Obcena]: http://keetology.com/
[Raccoon]: https://github.com/keeto/raccoon
[Pelican]: https://getpelican.com/
[docs.pelican.com]: http://docs.getpelican.com
[configuration on Github]: https://github.com/timwienk/website/blob/master/pelicanconf.py
[submitted this patch]: https://github.com/getpelican/pelican/pull/2117
["customsection" extension]: https://github.com/timwienk/website/blob/master/plugins/markdown_customsection/__init__.py
[theme on Github]: https://github.com/timwienk/website/tree/master/theme
[Let's Encrypt]: https://letsencrypt.org/
[X-Content-Type-Options]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/X-Content-Type-Options
[X-Frame-Options]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/X-Frame-Options
